docs: add table tutorial (#1273)
latticexyz/mud: docs/pages/tutorials/minimal/extend_schema.mdx

import { CollapseCode } from "../../../components/CollapseCode";

> # Extend the schema

Reviewer: "Add a table" might be a better name here

A table consists of a key schema and value schema, so "extend the schema" makes me think we'd be adding fields to the schema, not adding a new table.

1. In an editor, open `packages/contracts/mud.config.ts` and add a table definition for `History`.

   <CollapseCode>

   ```ts filename="mud.config.ts" showLineNumbers copy {9-17}
   import { mudConfig } from "@latticexyz/world/register";

   export default mudConfig({
     tables: {
       Counter: {
         keySchema: {},
         schema: "uint32",
       },
       History: {
         keySchema: {
           counterValue: "uint32",
         },
         schema: {
           blockNumber: "uint256",
           time: "uint256",
         },
       },
     },
   });
   ```

   </CollapseCode>

<details>
<summary>Explanation</summary>

A MUD table has two schemas:

- `keySchema`, the key used to find entries
- `schema`, the value in the entry (soon to be renamed to `valueSchema`)

Each schema is represented as a structure with field names as keys, and the appropriate [Solidity data types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html) as their values.

In this case, the counter value is represented as a 32 bit unsigned integer, because that is what `Counter` uses.
Block numbers and timestamps can be values up to `uint256`, so we'll use this type for these fields.

> </details>

Reviewer: should we indent this to the same level as the `1.`?

Author: Yes, we *should*. However, when I do it the prettier script breaks it. :-( 

When I try to  indent and then commit, `prettier` "fixes" it to this:

```html

    <details>
 <summary>Explanation</summary>

   A MUD table has two schemas:

   - `keySchema`, the key used to find entries
   - `schema`, the value in the entry (soon to be renamed to `valueSchema`)

   Each schema is represented as a structure with field names as keys, and the appropriate [Solidity data types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html) as their values.

   In this case, the counter value is represented as a 32 bit unsigned integer, because that is what `Counter` uses.
   Block numbers and timestamps can be values up to `uint256`, so we'll use this type for these fields.

    </details>

```

And then I get this error:

```
./pages/tutorials/minimal/add-table.mdx
Expected a closing tag for `<details>` (42:5-42:14) before the end of `listItem`
```

I spent enough time on it that I decided it's not worth hassling with.

Reviewer: I _think_ the trick to get it to work is add a blank line between the opening tag and its contents, like we did for the `<CollapsedCode>`.

However, this is part of manipulating the schema and therefore included in this tutorial.

```solidity
History.set(newValue, block.number, block.timestamp);
```

Set the value.
All MUD tables have a `<table>.set` function with the parameters being the key schema fields in order and then the value schema fields in order.

    </details>

2. Run this command in `packages/contracts` to rebuild everything this package produces.

   ```sh copy
   pnpm build
   ```

## Update the user interface

You can already run the application and see in the MUD Dev Tools that there is a `:History` table and it gets updates when you click **Increment**.
Click the **Store data** tab and select the table **:History**.

However, you can also add the history to the user interface.
The directions here apply to the `vanilla` client template, if you use anything else you'll need to modify them as appropriate.

1. Edit `packages/client/src/index.ts`.

   - Import two more functions we need (lines 3-4).
   - In `components.Counter.update$.subscribe`, add code that updates the selection of history values (lines 18-22).

>    - Add a function that is called when the user selects a different option (lines 31-37).

Reviewer: I feel like the highlighted lines below do enough to communicate line numbers? worried about forgetting to update these when the highlighted lines are updated, or vice versa

and the collapsed explanation below walks through line by line already

Author: You know the audience better than I do, if you don't think we need the line numbers here I'll remove them.

     const [nextValue, prevValue] = update.value;
     console.log("Counter updated", update, { nextValue, prevValue });
     document.getElementById("counter")!.innerHTML = String(nextValue?.value ?? "unset");

     let options: String = "";
     for (let i = 1; i <= nextValue?.value; i++) {
       options += `<option value="${i}">${i}</option>`;
     }
     document.getElementById("historyValue")!.innerHTML = options;
   });

   // Just for demonstration purposes: we create a global function that can be
   // called to invoke the Increment system contract via the world.
   // (See IncrementSystem.sol)
   (window as any).increment = async () => {
     console.log("new counter value:", await increment());
   };

   (window as any).readHistory = async (counterValue) => {
     const History = components.History;
     const entity = encodeEntity(History.metadata.keySchema, { counterValue });
     const { blockNumber, time } = getComponentValueStrict(History, entity);
     document.getElementById("blockNumber")!.innerHTML = blockNumber;
     document.getElementById("timeStamp")!.innerHTML = new Date(parseInt(Number(time) * 1000));
   };

>    mountDevTools();

Author: This isn't a snippet. It's the complete file, and people can copy it and paste to replace the existing one.

I updated it.

For the sake of simplicity, we will implement this in the `increment` function rather than use a [storage hook](/store/advanced-features#storage-hooks).

## Setup

Right now you need the `main` version of `mud`, not `next`.
So if you followed the directions, you need to run this command in the root directory.

```sh copy
pnpm mud set-version --tag main && pnpm install
```

## Modify the MUD configuration file

1. In an editor, open `packages/contracts/mud.config.ts` and add a table definition for `History`.

   <CollapseCode>

   ```ts filename="mud.config.ts" showLineNumbers copy {9-17}
   import { mudConfig } from "@latticexyz/world/register";

   export default mudConfig({
     tables: {
       Counter: {
         keySchema: {},
         schema: "uint32",
       },
       History: {
         keySchema: {
           counterValue: "uint32",
         },
         schema: {
           blockNumber: "uint256",
           time: "uint256",
         },
       },
     },
   });
   ```

   </CollapseCode>

<details>
<summary>Explanation</summary>

A MUD table has two schemas:

- `keySchema`, the key used to find entries

> - `schema`, the value in the entry

Author: I'll make a note in the tutorial that it will change relatively soon. That way when it changes the people who read it will be ready.

Each schema is represented is a structure with field names as keys, and the appropriate [Solidity data types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html) as their values.

In this case, the counter value is represented as a 32 bit unsigned integer, because that is what `Counter` uses.

> The block number and time are both the results of opcodes, so they are represented by the standard Solidity data type, `uint256` (unsigned 256 bit integer).

Author: OK.

</details>

> 2. Run this command in `packages/contracts` to regenerate the code.

Reviewer 2: Should we be more specific here?
```suggestion
2. Run this command in `packages/contracts` to regenerate the table libraries.
```

Here is `HistoryData`, copied from `packages/contract/src/codegen/History.sol`.

```solidity
struct HistoryData {
  uint256 blockNumber;
  uint256 time;
}
```

Note that `IncrementSystem` doesn't need to use `HistoryData`, because it only writes to history, it doesn't read from it.
However, this is part of manipulating the schema and therefore included in this tutorial.

```solidity
History.set(newValue, block.number, block.timestamp);
```

Set the value.
All MUD tables have a `<table>.set` function with the parameters being the key schema fields in order and then the value schema fields in order.

    </details>

2. Run this command in `packages/contracts` to rebuild everything this package produces.

   ```sh copy
   pnpm build
   ```

## Update the user interface

You can already run the application and see in the MUD Dev Tools that there is a `:History` table and it gets updates when you click **Increment**.
Click the **Store data** tab and select the table **:History**.

However, you can also add the history to the user interface.

> The directions here apply to the `vanilla` user interface, if you use anything else you'll need to modify them as appropriate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The directions here apply to the `vanilla` client template, if you use anything else you'll need to modify them as appropriate.
```

1. Install an additional package.
   Run this command in `packages/client`.

   ```sh copy
   pnpm install @latticexyz/store-sync@main

>    ```

Author: They do, removed from directions.

> 1. Edit `packages/clients/index.html`.

Author: Reordered

       </h2>
       <table border>
         <tr>
           <th>Block number</th>
           <th>Time</th>
         </tr>
         <tr>
           <td id="blockNumber"></td>
           <td id="timeStamp"></td>
         </tr>
       </table>
     </body>
   </html>
   ```

   </CollapseCode>

<details>
<summary>Explanation</summary>

```html
<hr />
<h2>
  History for value:
  <select id="historyValue" onInput="window.readHistory(value)"></select>
</h2>
```

This is the [input field](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/tag_select.asp) that lets the user select which counter value they'd like to get information about.
The `id` attribute will be used by `packages/client/src/index.ts` to set the options. The `onInput` attribute is the JavaScript code to execute when the value changes.

```html
<table border></table>
```

A standard [HTML table](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_tables.asp).

```html
<tr>
  <th>Block number</th>
  <th>Time</th>
</tr>
<tr>
  <td id="blockNumber"></td>
  <td id="timeStamp"></td>
</tr>
```

A location for the values, which will be set by `window.readHistory` in `index.ts`.

```html
   </table>
```

> Terminate the table in general.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTML closing tag for the table.
```
I'm not sure if we even need this line of explanation tbh, feel like we should expect basic html knowledge

Author: You're right. I tend to try and explain everything, but this is overkill.

   - Modify the second `import` line to import `History`.

     ```solidity
     import { Counter, History, HistoryData } from "../codegen/Tables.sol";
     ```

   - Modify the `increment` function to also update `History` by adding this line just before `return newValue`.

     ```solidity
     History.set(newValue, block.number, block.timestamp);
     ```

     To see the exact functions that are available, you can look at `packages/contracts/src/codegen/tables/History.sol` (that is the reason we ran `pnpm build:mud` to recreate it already).

<details>
   <summary>
     The complete file
   </summary>

     ```solidity
     // SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
     pragma solidity >=0.8.0;

     import { System } from "@latticexyz/world/src/System.sol";
     import { Counter, History, HistoryData } from "../codegen/Tables.sol";

     contract IncrementSystem is System {
       function increment() public returns (uint32) {
         uint32 counter = Counter.get();
         uint32 newValue = counter + 1;
         Counter.set(newValue);
         History.set(newValue, block.number, block.timestamp);
         return newValue;
       }
     }
     ```

> </details>

Reviewer: The Emojimon tutorial has some examples of how you can use a bigger, collapsed code block to "focus" on the changed lines but still allow for expanding+copying the entire file. We should use that here!

https://mud.dev/tutorials/emojimon/players-and-movement#11-create-the-components-as-tables

Author: Thank you, fixed.
